# Low Power Wide Area Networks 

The number of IoT devices is expected to grow significantly in the years and 2017 have marked the year where the number of connected devices surpassed the world population [1]. These connected devices have very specific characteristics and requirements: simple and cheap hardware, low-power operation modes and infrequent updates. While protocols like Bluetooth and ZigBee solve these problems when short-range communication is needed, for a vast number of IoT applications, where a high number of devices are deployed over large areas (e.g. a city), these short range solutions are suboptimal and expensive due to the complex and dense network infrastructure that must be installed. Cellular networks cover large areas, but are not power efficient. Moreover 2G, 3G or LTE connectivity, while present in urban areas, is not always present in rural areas. In order to address these problems, a new range of protocols and technologies have been developed or are being developed and fit into the general term of _Low Power Wide Area Networks_ (LPWAN). 

As the name suggests, LPWANs have the primary objective of providing low-power low-cost connectivity over large geographical areas. The applications are multiple and diverse: smart cities, smart grids, smart metering, logistics, industrial monitoring, agriculture, etc. 

In the last years, all the principal Standards Developing Organizations (SDO) such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) are intensifying their efforts in the standardization of LPWAN protocols. Moreover, numerous consortiums and alliances works to promote specific LPWAN technologies. Examples of such alliances are the LoRa Alliance promoting  the LoRaWAN protocol, the Dash7 Alliance promoting the Dash7 Alliance protocol and the Wightless-SIG promoting the Weightless protocol.

Even if the existing LPWAN protocols and solutions are extremely diverse and address different niches in the same application segment, most of them use similar solutions to solve the same range of problems. A quick overview is given below.

_Use of sub-GHz bands_: the vast majority of the LPWAN specifications take advantage of the good qualities of licensed or unlicensed sub-GHz bands in terms of attenuation, multipath fading and obstacles penetration. Moreover, sub-GHz bands are currently less congested than the overly used 2.4 GHz band. Most LPWAN technologies (e.g. LoRa and Sigfox) use the unlicensed ISM band, while cellular operators are trying to exploit already owned licensed frequency bands with the NB-IoT specifications. The use of ISM bands reduces the operational costs of running the network, but with the drawback of having to compel to the rules defined by legislative authorities for the usage of these bands.

_Use of narrowband or Spread Spectrum modulations_: the use of narrowband modulations has the advantage of reducing the bad effects that noise has on transmitted signals. Thanks to this, receivers can successfully recover severely attenuated signals and achieve a sensitivity level of even -130 dBm. On the other side, the reduced bandwidth allows only for fairly limited data rates in the order of few kbps or even few hundred of bps if an ultra-narrow band modulation is employed, where the bandwidth can be as low as 100 Hz. Some protocols, such as LoRa, use variations of Spread Spectrum to spread the narrowband signal over a wider bandwidth. The resulting signal has noise-like characteristics that make it more resistant to jamming and eavesdropping and more resilient to interference. To overcome the less efficient use of bandwidth, orthogonal codes are typically used in conjunction with Spread Spectrum techniques. This allows multiple overlapping signals using different codes to be recovered at the receiver.

_Low power operations_: in a LPWAN, end devices may be battery-powered and may require to operate using the same battery for many years. To reduce power consumption of end devices, LPWAN solutions use a simple and efficient star or start-of-stars topology where all the devices directly connect to one or multiple base stations. Multi-hop protocols are not used due to the fact that some nodes experience more traffic than others (hot-spots) and need to listen periodically for new messages coming from other nodes thus reducing the overall battery lifetime. Another frequently used technique to reduce the power consumption is the duty-cycling of devices, i.e. the alternation of ON-OFF communication periods. For example the communication may be started in uplink only when new data is ready and in downlink only at a predefined scheduled time usually immediately following an uplink transmission. Simple random access ALOHA-like MAC protocols, requiring simple and cheap hardware are typically employed. Finally, to save on computational power, the complexity is generally offloaded to the backend.

_Low cost deployment:_ installing, maintaining and operating the network should be as cheap as possible. LPWANs can achieve a chip cost as low as 1-2 \$ with an annual operation cost of 1 \$. This can be achieved by resorting to simple and sometimes inaccurate hardware components. The network backbone usually requires only few base stations to cover areas of tens of kilometers, thus additionally reducing the deployment cost of the network. Finally, most of the LPWAN solutions use the unlicensed ISM bands thus avoiding the need of investing millions of dollars in licenses acquisition.

_Scalability_: support of a large number of devices is usually achieved by diversifying as much as possible in channel, time and space. Since devices use simple hardware, this diversification is usually implemented in the backend by using multi-channel multi-antenna base stations to parallelize signal reception. Some protocols also implements mechanisms of adaptive data rate and channel selection, but given the strong link asymmetry of most LPWAN solutions, this mechanism, highly reliant on the downlink information transmitted by the base station, is quite limited.

   

\[1\] [Gartner](https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3598917)

\[2\] [A comparative study of LPWAN technologies for large-scale IoT deployment](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405959517302953)

\[3\] [Low Power Wide Area Networks: An Overview](http://home.deib.polimi.it/cesana/teaching/IoT/2017/papers/connectivity/LPWANSurvey.pdf)